---
title: Simulation and Floating Point Numbers -- Attempt 2
date: 2022-12-15 19:38:00 -0500
categories: [Random]
tags: [blog, tech, random]
math: true
mermaid: true
---

Let's look at some counting in decimal. Press the button below to increment the counter to the next number:

<div class="custom-style" id="decimal-display">
    <div class="increment-container">
    <div class="display">000</div><button class="increment">Increment</button>
    </div>
</div>

<p class="info-1">
Click the button to increment the number. We're paying special attention to what happens when we run out of digits for a place value.
</p>
<p class="info-2">
Notice how, after we see 9, the first place value resets and the second place value increments instead.
</p>
<p class="info-3">
Keep going. Notice how every time we have a 9 on the far right and try to increment our number, our second digit increments instead.
</p>
<p class="info-4">
This idea generalizes. We'll skip ahead for you on the next increment so we can see the second digit reset and see the third digit increment.
</p>
<p class="info-5">
Watch the third digit increment!
</p>

Let's forget everything we know about numbers. How would you explain the rules of counting to someone who has no idea what the _value_ of a number is? Here's how I'd do it.

We start with a `0`. This is the first number. If we increment a `0`, it becomes a `1`. Next time we increment, if we have a `1`, it becomes a `2`. So on. Here are all the transitions:

```
0 -> 1 -> 2 -> 3 -> 4 -> 5 -> 6 -> 7 -> 8 -> 9
```
{: file="Decimal Number Transitions"}

So when we're asked to 'increment' a number, we can look at this chart, find the current number, and replace it with the number that the arrow points at. 
When we increment `9`, we need to do something special. We reset back to `0`, move one place to the left, and increment that number. In school we learned this as `carrying`, like when you add two numbers together and their numerical result doesn't fit in the place value so we put it in a place that has more value. We'll come back to talking about the value of a place in a number later. Here's our revised flow chart.

```
0 -> 1 -> 2 -> 3 -> 4 -> 5 -> 6 -> 7 -> 8 -> 9 -> Carry + Reset
```
{: file="Decimal Number Transitions"}

And that's it. This scales infinitely and is blind to where in the number this is happening. Why does this happen at `9`? Because we're counting in decimal -- or `base-10`. That means that every place can have one of ten values: `0-9`. Let's change the base to something new.

## Binary

Let's make a change to our flow chart. Instead of having to go to `9`, what if we stopped at `1`?

```
0 -> 1 -> Carry + Reset
```
{: file="Binary Number Transitions"}

Let's try counting to these rules instead:

<div class="custom-style" id="binary-display">
    <div class="increment-container">
    <div class="display"></div><button class="increment">Increment</button>
    </div>
</div>

<p class="info-6">
Try counting in binary!
</p>
<p class="info-7">
Notice how our number immediately carries over into the next place value; we already ran out of numbers to put in that place!
</p>

I hope that this was a slighly better explanation of binary. Definitely more interactive. I'll experiment with this more in the future. For now, I need to study for `Intro to Algorithms`.

<script src="/assets/js/attempt2.js"></script>
